# Liberal Neutrality: A Dialogue Between Philonous and Oneiropolos

So, X, we have been wandering around my garden, engaged in a discussion of “liberal neutrality.“

When I pointed out to you that the liberal state is not neutral about many
things, you responded “Of course not! Who would want to be neutral about serial
killing, or Nazis?” So if the liberal state is not neutral about all things,
what does liberal neutrality actually mean?

Well, the liberal state is neutral about some things.

OK, but aren’t all states are neutral about some things? For instance, no state
ever made the law work differently for people over 5‘7“ than for those under
that height. No state ever discriminated amongst its citizens based on how much
body hair they had. So it would seem that every state is neutral about some
things but not other things

Of course, but the liberal state is MORE neutral than other states.

So, you have counted the number of ways in which a liberal regime is neutral,
and the number of ways in which all other regime are neutral, and the liberal
regime clearly had more ways in which it was neutral?

Don’t be ridiculous, I don’t mean that at all! I mean a liberal regime is neutral in ways in
which it is important to be neutral, while non-liberal regimes are not.

OK,OK, let us consider an Islamic regime. And that regime will not be
neutral between Muslims and non-Muslims. But it may very well be neutral about
whether or not someone decides to bake a cake for a gay couples’ wedding. Where
is our currentWhereas our current liberal regime makes the exact opposite
choices.

YesYes, that is correct.

So I’m backgroundsSo on what grounds do you consider the liberal regime’s
neutrality correct, and the Islamic regime’s neutrality mistaken?

Well, the distinction between Muslims and non-Muslims is not an important one, not for legal purposes.

But it certainly is important to a devout Muslim, is it not? And very much for
legal purposes, given the idea of sharia law. 

But that belief is not reasonable!

However, it is a central part of being a devout Muslim. Are you saying it is not reasonable to be a devout Muslim?

No, no, I certainly do not mean that! But it’s not reasonable for a devout
Muslim to favor their own religion over others.

Why not?

Because it violates liberal neutrality between religious beliefs!

So you are saying it is reasonable to be a devout Muslim, just so long as one
is even more devoted to liberalism than to Islam?

Now wait a second... I must not mean that. You’re trying to confuse me!

If that is confusing, let’s turn our attention to an anarcho-communist regime.
Such a regime would be neutral as to whether its citizens chose to respect
someone’s claim to own 1000 acres of land or not, wouldn’t it?

Yes, I guess it would...

So that regime would be neutral over a matter where liberal regimes are quite decidedly non-neutral, wouldn’t it?

Well, yes, but that is not a reasonable claim!

Why not?

Well, John Locke put forward arguments as to why claims to private property are just.

So, you’re saying that, in order to be reasonable, one must accept John Locke‘s
philosophy? I thought the advantage of liberalism was that it was neutral
between such basic philosophical stances?

Of course, sure it is. But there are other arguments for private property as well.

So the liberal regime considers philosophical positions reasonable, only if
they endorse private property, and unreasonable, if they do not? That hardly
seems neutral!

But private property is a basis for civilization!

So you say. But other people say belief in God is a basis for civilization, or
the suppression of people’s inclination to follow their baser passions is the
basis for civilization. Why does your belief about what is the basis for
civilization trump their beliefs?

There are other great arguments for founding civilization in private property.
Look at Ayn Rand, or Murray Rothbard, or Robert Nozick.

Sure, let’s look at them... But looking at them I see in the backdrop
anarcho-capitalism. Weren’t you friends with some of those folks at one time?

Sure, they are good people, they believe in liberty.

But they don’t believe in taxation, do they? In fact, they think taxation is a
form of theft, the state itself is inherently an unjust institution, and state
agents are a gang of robbers. So, if one of them ask on these beliefs, and, for
instance, shoots a state agent who has come to collect taxes, your 
liberal regime would be neutral about their act, since they’re acting on their
own personally held reasonable beliefs?

Not at all! We would have to arrest them, and put them in prison. They’re free
to believe those things, but not to act upon those beliefs!

But if I believe government agents are robbers coming to violate my rights,
isn’t a corollary of that belief that I have myself the right to defend myself
against their aggression? It sounds like your position is pretty similar to the
position of Hegel, that Marx blew up: Hegel, Marx said, had “resolved” the
contradictions of bourgeois society, but only notionally. Hegel’s resolution
had done absolutely nothing to rectify the actual, material conditions stemming
from those contradictions. Hegel had flown off into an abstract realm, rather
than fixing the problem in the real world. Isn’t that exactly what you ask of
your anarcho-capitalist friends? That it is fine for them to believe that the
state is a vast apparatus of criminals robbing them of their justly held
possessions, but they absolutely must not put that belief into practice in the
real world?



And so it seems to me that you are saying that a just regime should be neutral
between all reasonable beliefs... And that the only reasonable beliefs are
liberal beliefs. But now I can’t see any distinction in terms of neutrality
between a liberal regime, which is neutral between all liberal beliefs, and a
communist regime, which is neutral between all communist beliefs, or an Islamic
religion, which is neutral between all Islamic beliefs.

But accepting those beliefs would lead to conflict, and a lack of respect for persons!

So our current liberal regime is free of conflicts? It doesn’t lack respect for
those who think they should not be forced to bake a cake for a gay couples
wedding, or who think that private property is theft, or who believe that the
only truly just regime follows Sharia law?

Of course we respect them... We just ask them to behave like good liberals!

And let us consider, for a moment, the currently popular “woke” beliefs that
say, for instance, that criticism of BLM is actually hate speech, and hate
speech is a form of violence, so such speech ought to be banned, as a rights
violation. If you asked these folks, most of them would consider themselves
liberal. So you’re OK with their program?

No! I am a classical liberal. We believe in absolute free speech rights.

OK, but these woke people do not. So you rule their view out as unreasonable?

No, they can believe whatever they want in my liberal regime. They just can’t put their beliefs into law.

But their beliefs precisely are that this hate speech ought to be against the law. So you’re fine with them believing this, just so long as they don’t actually act upon their belief?

Sure, because this classical liberal framework entails respect for all people, and prevents conflict. 

And what percentage of the US population would you say currently is “classical liberal“?

I don’t know: 20%? 30%?

So your position is that this distinct minority of the population can respect the rest of the population and prevent conflict by forcing its views of what a just regime is on all the rest of the population?

Now, now, if you put it that way, I know it sounds ridiculous, but...

But?

But the liberal regime is neutral!






