# What to make of Curtis Yarvin

How should a Christian rank political regimes? Judging along what is merely one
access, it is clear that a Christian should order, from best to worst, regimes
that:

1. Actively support a Christian life.
2. At least do not get in the way of a Christian life.
3. Actively undermine a Christian life.

It is clear to me that today we live under the third type of regime. Thus, a
move to a regime of type two would be a marked improvement.

And that brings us to Curtis Yarvin's recent political writing. 


Yarvin says that the average American citizen today is a "hobbit" who "just
wants to grill." (The number of Christians who got upset at him for his
"hobbit" characterization apparently had forgotten that it was a devout
Catholic who came up with that metaphor for the common people in the first
place.) Well, it would be nice if we lived in a polity full of Aristotelian
spoudaios (mature people), eager to engage in intelligent discussions about how
we should arrange our political life. But we do not, and the average American
couch potato, while a sort of spud, is no sort of spoudaios, and transforming
him into one will be no mean task. Morality requires, among other things, that
we base our actions upon a realistic evaluation of the circumstances in which
we find ourselves, rather than upon fantasy or wishful thinking. If Yarvin is
correct in his assessment of the degree of political engagement of the average
American, and I think that he is, then we must take that reality into account
in evaluating different proposals for improving the current political
situation.

And among Yarvin's requirements for "The contract of any next regime" are:

"Every culture has the right to educate its children in the doctrines of its
own tradition. Every culture has the right to judge the behavior of its
members, or conflicts between its members, by the law of its own tradition.
Every culture has the right to tax its own members and collectively spend their
resources, without subsidizing other cultures, funding the central government
by a fair and uniform percentage of internal revenue. Every culture has the
right to preserve its own tradition with a content barrier. And while every
person can leave any culture, any culture can reject or eject any person."
(https://graymirror.substack.com/p/the-contract-of-any-next-regime)

In other words, Yarvin quite explicitly defends the right of Christians to live
in a Christian culture (if they wish to!), to set their own laws for the
members of their culture, to prevent anti-Christian ideas from undermining
their culture, and to decide who is actually a member and who isn't, so long as
they allow free exit. So, quite certainly, this is not a recommendation to
establish a pro-Christian government. And by his principle, Satanist would also
have the right to establish a pro-Stanist culture. But it *is* a proposal for a
form of government that is not actively hostile to Christian communities. In
other words, he recommends establishing a neutral regime, rather than enduring
the current regime, which is actively anti-Christian.


One reason some people might reject opting for a neutral regime is they think
the number one option, a regime that promotes Christian life, is possible. In
our current situation, I do not think it is. Perhaps Adrian Vermeule would say
that I lack sufficient imagination… and perhaps he would be correct. But I am
stuck with making judgments based on the imagination that I actually have, not
the imagination I might hope to have. 



One fellow Christian, upon seeing me defend Yarvin, said, "But he is a
nihilist!" Well, if true, that is bad, but: 
1. It is not really relevant as to whether his current political proposals are worth considering; and
2. Whatever he once said about his philosophical stance, I don't think it
accurately describes his current beliefs.

I am only familiar with Yarvin's recent writing. I am dimly aware that at some
point in the past he appeared online as some character named "Mendacious Moldy
Bugs," or something like that. I don't think I ever read a single word written
by that persona. And perhaps it was accurate to describe that persona as a
nihilist; indeed, I have been told that he himself described himself as such. 

But when I look at what he has been writing over the past few years, I find him
saying things like "the prerevolutionary consensus on the purpose of government
is quite consistent. It fits in a Latin motto, salus populi suprema lex: the
health of the people is the supreme law."
(https://graymirror.substack.com/p/policies-of-the-deep-right)

Or, consider this one: "The largest existential risk facing humanity is the present global
political order." (https://graymirror.substack.com/p/do-not-punch-rationalists)

A nihilist would not care what the supreme law is, nor would he be worried
about existential threats to human life on our planet. In fact, a true nihilist 
would *welcome* existential risk to humanity, right?
So even if this label applied to Yarvin at some point in the past, I'd have to
say it no longer does.

Another complaint against Yarvin is his categorizing the Dobbs decision is a
loss for the people celebrating it. Why does he say this?

"An action is strategically useful if, after that action, it is easier to
replace the regime. Let’s call a useful action a strike—making a useless or
'ounterproductive one a ball. (Note that the French coup translates as strike.)

"See how easy this is? Dobbs is not a strike, because post Dobbs, the elves get
motivated and the hobbits demotivated. If the regime can only be changed by
coordinated hobbit action against Elf-Ruled America, and this action becomes
harder, Dobbs is a net lose -- a ball."
(https://graymirror.substack.com/p/two-strokes-of-state)

Yarvin is **not** claiming that a "right" to abortion should be protected;
instead, his claim is that Dobbs is actually a loss for pro-life people,
because it has energized pro-abortion forces while causing anti-abortion people
to relax. While there are many factors at play in the upcoming mid-term
elections, Democrats are clearly hoping to motivate their base by citing the
Dobbs decision. And perhaps that will work!

If it does, and the result is an increased Democratic majority in both houses,
pro-abortion forces might very well get congress to pass a law mandating an
unlimited right to abortion, a law states could not override. So, while
Yarvin's strategic analysis of the impact of Dobbs might be *wrong*, it is not
"pro-abortion": it is prudential warning to consider the long-term impact of
some governmental action, rather than merely looking at whether it *appears* to
be a victory for one's side.

A Christian operating in the political sphere ought not to base their decisions
upon wishful thinking. Prudence is a virtue, and while not succumbing to
utilitarianism, we are obliged to take the likely outcome of our decisions into
account when evaluating them. If we conclude our best bet right now is to
replace a hostile regime with a neutral regime, then we ought to cooperate with
others seeking to bring about that same end, even if we disagree with them on
other, very fundamental matters.








